Beavers have the ability to modify ecosystems profoundly to meet their ecological needs, with significant associated hydrological, geomorphological, ecological, and societal impacts. They engineer ecosystems by building dams, which retain ponds full of sediment, nutrients, plants, and wildlife. These dams slow the flow of water, reducing peak flows downstream, storing and gently releasing water in times of drought. This review summarizes how beaver impact ecosystem structure and geomorphology, hydrology and water resources, water quality, freshwater ecology, and humans and society.

Beaver dam sequences and wetlands act as a cause of flow attenuation, sometimes described as "slowing the flow." Beaver ponds lengthen water retention times and reduce the velocity of the water passing through a catchment. Water stored in beaver ponds is released slowly as the porous dams gently leak both during and following rainfall, elevating stream base flows even during prolonged dry periods. Beaver activity can reduce downstream hydrological connectivity, and conversely increase lateral connectivity, forcing water sideways into neighboring riparian land. Pond sequences have been shown to reduce the peak flows of 2-year return floods by 14%, whereas individual dams reduced flood peaks of similar events by only 5.3%.

On water quality: when beaver dams inhibit the transport of fine sediments, large volumes of organic and inorganic compounds become stored within beaver ponds, including nitrogen, phosphorus, and particulate (bound) carbon. Beaver ponds are effective at retaining phosphorus associated with high sediment loads and can act as sinks for phosphorus. Multiple studies found that concentrations and loads of dissolved organic carbon increase due to beaver activity.

On freshwater ecology and biodiversity: the enhancement of natural processes, floodplain inundation, lateral connectivity, and structural heterogeneity in beaver-impacted environments creates a diverse mosaic of habitats. Beaver ponds support more lentic (still-water) species and typically demonstrate increased invertebrate abundance, biomass, and density. Beavers affect aquatic vegetation through direct and indirect mechanisms over a range of spatial and temporal scales. Canopy-opening and floodplain inundation creates wetland areas with reduced shading, providing opportunities for shade-intolerant, opportunistic, and wetland plant species. Beaver activity increases the heterogeneity of stream depth, flow velocity, and benthic habitats. These beaver-induced habitat changes, particularly increased heterogeneity, can benefit fish populations. Regarding salmonids, it is established that salmonid species can navigate beaver dams, though there is evidence that the presence of dams does alter the way they move within river networks.

On humans and society: flow attenuation resulting from beaver damming is likely to reduce the potential for flooding of properties downstream. Beavers are often considered charismatic and, as a keystone species, are associated with biodiverse landscapes, which they create and maintain. However, challenges also arise: where water is stored behind beaver dams, it may inundate land owned by humans, which could lead to a financial cost, especially when associated with agriculture or forestry. Those people who experience the benefits of beaver activity may differ from those who experience the costs, which can create tension in management decisions. The best management strategies are those where issues are mutually addressed between wildlife management authorities and stakeholders, balancing the ecological and hydrological benefits beavers provide against the localized costs they can impose on land use.
